# MIS581Capstone

Identifying Cybersecurity Anomalies: Data Analytics

Information technology has grown drastically over the course of the last few years.  Many organizations use information technology (IT) to conduct normal operations and will continue to do so well into the future.  A large reason for IT playing a large role in the success of these organizations is data.  Information technology uses computers to mainly process, create, retrieve, and use data.  Organizations recognize the intrinsic value behind data.  Organizations know that data is integral to remain competitive and grow within their industry.  The opportunity to use data effectively is a challenge most organizations face today.  Organizations, though, are willing to navigate through these challenges because the value in analysis creates tremendous opportunity.

Data and Information

Data analytics is a critical tool used by many organizations.  The generalizations produced by data analytics provide insights and trends significant in meeting an organization’s mission objectives.  There are four types of analytics: descriptive, diagnostic, predictive, and prescriptive.  Combined with a business setting, analytics “extract meaningful insights from data that an organization can use to inform its strategy and ultimately, reach its objectives” (Stobierski, 2021, para 2).  Organizations know not to underestimate the value of data.  Value can be derived from data in numerous ways.  Sadowski (2019) notes that value can be found by the way data is used to profile and target people, optimize systems, manage, and control things, model probabilities, and grow the value of assets. 

Information technology plays a large role in meeting an organization’s mission objectives.  Big data’s influence in strategic planning changes the scope and direction for an organization.  Data and information are significant parts of big data and create value in several ways.  The possibilities to build on its potential are endless.  The constant need to collect and protect data is a necessary task for organizations in this data-driven world.  An organization’s success is dependent on how it manipulates and utilize data especially when this year alone in 2022, seventy percent (70%) of the world’s GDP underwent digitalization (Bulao, 2022).  

Organizational Opportunities and Objectives

Data provided by network monitoring provides various opportunities for organizations to use for machine learning.  Machine learning uses statistical analyses and computer algorithms with data.  Network features such as source and destination bytes provide valuable information about network traffic.  Source bytes are the specific number of bytes from the source host.  Destination bytes are the specific number of bytes from the destination host.  For this research study, the number of source and destination bytes can hypothetically determine if an anomaly exists.  If there is a relationship between the number of bytes (predictor) and anomaly (response), the United States Cyber Command can strategically plan countermeasures against the associated internet protocol (IP) connections.  These policies and plans then aid an organization in cybersecurity protections.        

