Data exploration is a critical part of data analytics.  Data exploration allows researchers to uncover patterns and characteristics prior to data and statistical analysis.  Data exploration create a general picture of the data and gives a chance for researchers to look for missing values and/or details that may need to be studied more in greater detail (Sisense, n.d.).  It provides more insight and often leads to a better questioning attitude and possible hypotheses. Data exploration consists of different types of study, but a major advantage, especially when using analytic tools, is visualization.  Data visualization adds a lot of critical details that may be missed from exploring the numerical data alone.  Data visualization offers the “understanding of the underlying structure within the data, which can enable hypothesis generation and data interpretation” (Rhodes et al., 2020).  

There are various types of descriptive statistics prevalent in research.  Descriptive statistics is a beneficial way to determine what kind of data is available for research.  Descriptive statistics helps researchers “understand and describe the aspects of a specific set of data by providing brief observations and summaries about the sample” (Conner & Johnson, 2017, p 52).    Determining the means of tendency describes a dataset by identifying the central position.  In this case, the central tendency is a significant feature.  

The research question focuses on three variables: source bytes, destination bytes, and outcome.  Central tendency consists of the mean, median, and mode.  It allows research to focus on numerical values to form a working hypothesis relevant to the research question.   Figure 1 shows a table of descriptive statistics for three variables: source bytes, destination bytes, and outcome.  Data points between the 0-50% show similar number of bytes in terms of tendency.  Toward the 75% quartile, numbers drastically change for source and destination bytes.  The data for destination bytes increase in numbers are higher than 500 bytes as supposed to source bytes which stay under 500 bytes.  The means are also significantly different between source and destination bytes.  The number of bytes for network traffic flow is more evident for source bytes.  The mean for source bytes is approximately 10,000 bytes while destination bytes remain closer to 2,000 bytes.  


Bar charts are also helpful in determining the ratio among values for a variable.  In this case, a bar chart offers the researcher an insight between a normal interaction vice an anomaly within a network system.  The value count between normal and anomalies are 9,711 to 12,833.  Figure 2 offers a visualization in respect to the value counts of outcome.  At first glance, both indications are close in value and do not offer a clear visualization between the two types of outcomes.  Further investigation and research are required to make proper assumptions and propositions.  For instance, the number of anomalies is much higher than normal indications.  The number of source and destination bytes that show an anomaly, though, are much lower than what shows of a normal indication.  The number of source bytes show very similar numbers for both an anomaly and normal indication as compared to destination bytes.

Descriptive statistics, alongside visualizations, also show different traits about the data and noticeable trends like outliers.  Outliers call attention for the researcher to further review the data (Shmueli et al., 2018).  Boxplots, for example, provide information about outliers, the minimum, first quartile, median, third quartile, and the maximum position of where data points lie.  Figures 3 and 4 show the number of outliers outside the central tendency of both the source and destination bytes.  The number of destination bytes for a normal indication have a larger range than that of an anomaly.   There are several outliers present for both features and may require further investigation regarding the dataset.  Although box plots offer a visual summary into destination and source bytes, grouped by outcome, the outliers may indicate different possibilities.  These possibilities may range among insufficient data information, skewness, and/or bias. 

References

Conner, B. & Johnson, E.  (2017).  Descriptive statistics.  American Nurse Today, 12(11), 52-55. https://www.myamericannurse.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/ant11-Research-101-1017a.pdf 

Rhodes, J., Cutler, A., Wolf, G. and Moon, K.  (2020 Jun 15).  Supervised visualization for data exploration, 1-21.  https://arxiv.org/pdf/2006.08701.pdf

Shmueli, G., Bruce, P., Yahav, I., Patel, N. & Lichtendahl, K. (2018).  Data Mining for Business Analytics: Concepts, Techniques, and Applications in R.  John Wiley & Sons Inc.  

Sisense.  (n.d.).  What is data exploration?  https://www.sisense.com/glossary/data-exploration/


