The dataset used for this research project stems from the KDDCup in 1999.  The KDDCup is an annual Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery Competition organized by ACM Special Interests Group on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.  The dataset tasked competitors to formulate and use data mining techniques and tools to create a predictive model pertaining to a network intrusion detector.  Network intrusion detectors distinguish illegitimate connections within a computer network.  As part of the task, the data collected was from a simulated military network environment.  

The dataset in use, NSL-KDD, holds the same forty-two (42) different attributes as the original KDDCup dataset and is divided into three sections: individual transmission control protocols (TCPs), connections suggested by domain knowledge, and traffic features.  The NSL-KDD dataset, though, is thought to be an improvement of the KDDCup dataset.  The NSL-KDD dataset has 22,544 rows vice the more than 1 million rows from the original dataset. 

The specific features used for this research study are source bytes, destination bytes, and outcome.  Source and destination bytes are continuous, numerical values; outcome is categorical.  For the sake of this research, outcome will be replaced by either the values 1 or 0.  Normal tendencies will be labeled as ‘1’ while anomalies will be labeled as ‘0’.  The modification is necessary as part of the data preparation process.  Data preparation is a significant part of data analyses and processing.  By modifying the data, all values within the dataset remain numerical for ease of comparison and forming relationships.  This aids the use of data analytic tools and methods.  

